We now want to answer the reason question: How does English vocabulary relate with reading comprehension performance among Grade 11 learners in Lesotho?
To arrive at an answer the students were asked: question 4 and 6


School E
Student 2 - 11 - 16 - male
4. It limits me when I am reading comprehension with the aim of understanding because I am not going to be able to understant other words. That lack of understanding increases my chances of getting the question wrong...

6. It allows me to be able to read hard statements with understanding because I exposed myself to many words through my vocabulary and it increases my chances in being confused when I encounter unfamiliar words and my vocabulary allows me to understand the conversation among people in the comprehension and the meaning behind the words.

Student 3 - 11 - 16 - Female
****4. My vocabulary is not enough due to the words I have seen or have challenged me for this three years of reading comprehension. I am sometimes fail because of my scarce vocabulary and lack of knowledge of some words that  appear in the passage I am reading.

6. It helps me a lot since every passage or paragraph have vocabulary, so having my own vocabulary help me to replace or understand some of the words in the passage and sometimes my vocabulary is the same that is used in the passage so that makes it easier for me to understand and be able to answer those type of questions that have vocabulary.

Student 4 - 11 - 17 - Male
****4. My vocabulary is very, very weak and that has a huge impact on overall reading comprehension performance because I frequently encounter many unfamiliar word that I don't know so I always pick random words that I feel they are right hence my overall performace is affected because of my poor performance. 

	*********Student 5 - 11 - 16 - Female
	4. It affects it negatively as I sometimes encounter plenty words I do not know and so my performance drops. I also come across words I know but fail to comprehend because the word has several meanings and I may happen to know one or two meanings of the word.

6. It gives me a better chance to understand the passage and therefore answer the questions correctly. This results in better performance in reading comprehension especially if I comes across words I'm familiar with. It also assists me with obtaining higher marks as I'm able to answer questions with precision.


Student 9 - 11 - 16 - Male
4. My vocabulary is not that wide, it is poor thus when I am writing exams I see a lot of unfamiliar words which I have never seen or read about so this affect my performance in reading comprehension because I get lost while reading and end up not understanding the passage. Therefore, my reading comprehension performance is very poor. Morever, the last question of the meaning in context I fail to get full marks because of the words I can't understand.



School D
Student 3 -
4. Sometimes knowing a lot of words can affect the answering of questions in a positive way that is, I will be able to answer questions and improve my marks.

6. Knowing a lot of words helps me to interact with the comprehension. When I know a lot of words, I can read the comprehension fluently without problems and answering questions is easy. Time management is easily kept.

Student 4 - 11 - 15 - Female
6. Overall, having a good vocabulary helps me to understand the comprehension more deep



School C
Student 1
4. My vocabulary proficiency affects my overall reading comprehension performance negatively because I can't make sense of what I am reading because I don't know meaning of those unfamiliar words.

Student 3
4. My vocabulary proficiency affect my overall reading comprehension performance negatively because words that I do not know may be key words that I need. Furthermore, it also affects the way I answer questions.

Student 4
4. Personally, I think my vocabulary proficiency has been a major contributor in helping me boost my previously poor performance in reading comprehensions. An example of this is in summary questions where using my own words is no longer as complicated as it used to be.

6. Positively, as I can skim through text and easily identify the important points in the text.

Student 5. 
6. It contributes positively as I'm able to tackle question associated with the requirements to apply vocabulary proficiency. As well as being able to answer own-words questions.

Student 6. 
4. It affects it negatively because I have a weak vocabulary proficiency because I barely read and find thorough understanding in unfamiliar words.



School B
Student 3
4. My vocabulary proficiency is not good...so sometimes while I am still reading the passage, I don't understand other words or the who sentence...

Student 4
4.It affects my passage performance very bad because I an unable to express my self due to lack of vocabulary proficiency. Again I am unable to approach the own-words questions due to lack of vocabulary proficiency.