School A Rural Church
Student 1 - 11 - 15 - Female
		1. Performance
		2. Attitude
		5. Types of questions
Everything has been good so far because I most of the times understand the comprehension even though the question regarding the text are sometimes a challenge. I tackle them by taking meaning into context when it comes to vocabulary proficiency.
a. To find out something.
b. To hang out with.
c. Disasterous
d. Coming with a heavy price
e. A gift

2. I feel uneasy because I do not use them regulary in my everyday life which is bad especially for a student. I usually handle them by

5. I encounter challenges with own-word questions. The would require me to explain maybe a phrase or sentence according to how it was used in the comprehension. I have attempted to solve them reading the phrase multiple times as to understand what is really wants.

Student 2 - 11 - 15  - Male
I would honestly say my performance is quite bad. The reason being, I fail to answer questions and I also fail to reach the expectation required by the questions.
a. It is to find out more about something
b. To have a lot of quality of something
c. It means something is many
d. It means the thing is expensive
e. It is a type of tense that refers to the exact moment

2. Whenever I encounter an unfamiliar word my mood quickly turns off because I feel the word is tough and have started to note down unfamiliar words and look for the meaning.

5. I encounter challenges especially to factual questions because some of the answers are completely hidden and I fail to spot them. I also encounter problems mostly on vocabulary questions because I am not fully equipped with vocabulary. In order to solve my problem, I have decided to explore different kinds of words and learn to apply them in any writing.

Student 3 - 11 - 20 - Male
My reading comprehension is law becuse majority of the vocabulary words are just beyond my mind whereby I lack practice. And the solution to these can be only to build a group discussion. Also, I should practice consulting when classes are finished.
a. Unprotect
b. To have lot of emotions
c. Give
d. Expensive
e. Gift

2. I try by all means to make sure that I understand what the question demand me to do. Moreover I repeat the story several times and understand the meaning of the based on how it is used in the passage.

Student 4 - 11 - 16 - Female
My reading comprehension is incredibly bad because I do not consult frequently. I consult English once or twice a week. I do not have a lot of vocabulary words which leads to me not understanding the comprehension at all.
a. Finding out something
b. To have a lot of particular things
c. Someone who is too much troublesome
d. Demands more money
e. Being available

2. I feel a bit happy because unfamiliar words improve my vocabulary. While reading them I try to understand their meaning in the comprehension that that would make me understand the words.

Student 5 - 11 - 16 - Male
I would say my performance on reading comprehension is not the one that would give me good marks/symbols at the end of the year. The reason why I am saying is because the students in my school or my classmates do want is called self introspect the do not discuss with other all the do is to works alone and keep their own knowledge to themselves and that kills some of us. Well based on my performance ever since I arrived at my school I has not improved instead it has droped because I put my time on things not based on school.
a. It is to find out
b. Having a lot of qualitities
c. To annoy
d. Has a high price
e. It can mean something happening now or a gift.

2. When I encounter unfamiliar words while reading, I sometimes feel declared for that new or unfamiliar word is going to improve my vocabulary but sometimes they do not make me happy I sometimes miss the tense or the pronounsation of the word. Well I sometimes just leave them unless it interests me, Sometimes I write it fown check for it meaning in my dictionary or look for its synonym so that the next time it comes in my head I can say it or write it down.

Student 6 - 11 - 16 - Male
I am unable to fully understand the meaning in context behind the question that I am presented with. This has lead to me incorrectly interpreting the question randering me to answer incorrectly. In conclusion my comprehension performance is what I could called poor.
a. To find something out
b. To have plenty of
c. Something anoying
d. Very expensive
e. Gift

2. I feel very irritate because it is sometimes very difficult to understand the meaning behind the presented word. But I read the sentence in which it was used to understand what the word means.

Student 7 - 11 - 17 - Female
From most of the comprehension I have written in the exam papers the performance is bad and I've realised that sometimes I read a question without understanding what is needed by the questions. Sometimes the vocabulary used in some questions makes me fail to understand the meaning of the question. I have realised that I will have to improve my vocabulary by reading novels as an example. I am not good in providing synonyms when analysing the question.
a. Overcome
b. Having a lot of emotions or qualities
c. Being kind
d. Expensive
e. Gift

2. Sometimes I feel like I am careless because I have not taken responsibility to keep learning new things everyday.

5. I encounter challenges with vocabulary questions, inferential questions and own word questions sometimes because of the vocabulary used. I fail to provide synonyms to answer own word questions and to the issue of vocabulary questions sometimes I do not answer them because of not being familiar with the vocabulary words. I don't read extensively and I do not consult or even practice English this is why I fail these questions. To improve that, I decided to write my own vocabulary for the words which I am familiar with and some which I see for the first time. I make follow ups for everything about this types of questions.

Student 8 - 11 - 17 - Male
My reading comprehension performance is very bad because there is no improvement. There has been failure to understand the main points. Not understanding what idea is being potrait causes my failure since I sometimes fail to understand what the comprehension is talking about. My performance has not shown any improvement because of failing to differentiate types of questions and how they are supposed to be answered.
a. To find
b. Having many qualities
c. A lot to deal with
d. Greatly
e. Gift

2. When encountering unfamiliar words, I feel very challenged. Scanning through the passage again has proven to be very helpful to me since I get the idea of what the words are used. 

****5. Own word questions are usually most problematic since they demand a person who has high knowledge of English. One word questions are also the types of comprehension questions that lead me to encounter challenges like not being able to see which words are needed which express a certain reaction that is being shown during a particular action taking place at that time.

Student 9 - 11 - 17 - Female
My reading comprehension performace is not as good as I suppose or expect it to be because I do not read extensively, the only time I read is with a task assigned to me in the class or in an exam. I also do not give myself enough to get to know unfamiliar words which would help me if I gave myself time to know them for most of them are hard to find but for people who read extensively they are the simplest words.
a. TO find something new
b. To have different emotions
c. Something which needs an extra helping hand
d. Something which needs a lot of money or more money than expected of that
e. To be available

2. I feel excited because I get to add more on the vocabulary words I have which help me in improving my command of English as a language. Although I will be in an exam at that moment, I make sure that when I get out of the exam room I check for the meaning of the word and begin using it daily when I speak and when I write so that I do not have problems when I encounter it next time in another paper.

5. I encounter challenges with own word question. I am not able to find the expected key words and if I do, I sometimes do not know the correct synonyms for those key words, then the whole answer to the qiestions becomes wrong even if it were to be correct. The lack of English speaking makes it difficult  to find synonyms of the key words words which inturn cause me to failing to answer own word questions, with these I tried many ways to speak correct English which is ofcourse coming along really good.

Student 10 - 11 - 17 - Female
My reading comprehension has been a good one because I have never failed it before. I have always been able to lift almost all the points from passage one. I have always been able to have an understaning of the passage and this enabled to lift the points required by the question. I must admit though that when I first started writing the comprehension I found it a bit challenging but fortunately I managed to get a clear understanding of the comprehension. With that having been said, I never had that much of trouble in relation to reading comprehension.
a. To find out something new or unfamiliar
b. Full of or showing a certain behaviour
c. Too much to handle
d. Expensive
e. Available at the time in a certain place.

2. Encountering unfamiliar words tends to stress me out because it makes me feel like I will not be able to answer questions related to the word. As challenging as it may be, I just try to work out the meaning in context so that I get to understand how the word is used. I also try to replace the unfamiliar words that I encounter with some simple synonyms. I also try to change the whole phrase with a phrase that I think may be related or have similar meaning to the phrase in question.







Going though School A, a church-run school in a rural area in Lesotho, paints a picture of over 80% of the grade 11 learners performing poorly in reading comprehension and in English altogether. There are three indicators of this. First, the responses of the learners when asked to describe their reading comprehension performance. 8 out of 10 learners stated their performance is poor which the general response being, "My reading comprehension is incredibly bad", as Student 4, a young lady 16 years old. Her response captures those of 7 of her counterparts. Next, the quality of English seen in their writing of these responses. From reading just three responses, it can be seen that these students lack in vocabulary, punctuation and grammar. Lastly, their answers to question 8 of the questionnaire which required that they define a few terms without being provided context; the lack of context was give the advantage of not having to be restricted to a certain meaning and the results show a very low vocabulary proficiency. All these are to imply that that large a percentage of the learners of this particular school are bound for poor performance in English at LGCSE. However, 2 out of the 10 state, with confidence that their reading comprehension performance is good. Student 10's response is worth reading in its entirey: "My reading comprehension has been a good one because I have never failed it before. I have always been able to lift almost all the points from passage one. I have always been able to have an understaning of the passage and this enabled to lift the points required by the question. I must admit though that when I first started writing the comprehension I found it a bit challenging but fortunately I managed to get a clear understanding of the comprehension. With that having been said, I never had that much of trouble in relation to reading comprehension." The 17 year-old young lady shows great promise for the English final examination as her current performance can be used as a point of reference.







School B Rural Government
Student 1 - 11 - 18 - Male
Not really good because I dont't read to understand. I just scan and find the answer so this makes it hard to find the correct answer.
a. It is to find out what I did not know before
b.
c. To be able to give a hand someone
d. Something that is expensive or with a high price
e. It is a gift.

2. Worried, because I already see that these unfamiliar words will decrease my marks. I there for leave the question not answered.

*****5. Inferential questions, answering by refering to the passages. I find the difficult because I sometimes understand the question but not the answer for it in the passage.

Student 2 - 11 - 18 - Male
My performance is no good because sometimes I do not understand the format of question. Such as the way we write points, for examples, point out the advantages and disadvantages of argiculture.
a. 
b.
c.
d.
e.

2. I feel angry because sometime the word makes me to loose the hole understanding of the paragraph. I ignore them and keep reading the paragraph.

Student 3 - 11 - 16 - Male
My performance is really not good when it comes to reading comprehension because I haven't really give myself a time to find out what really my problem is.
a. Find out
b. Talking with someone
c. To be able to work together
d. Expensive
e. Gift

2. I am having stress because I don't know how am I going to deal with such problem. And I skip such words or I write or read the way I think it says. 

*****5. I am really not good at inferential questions and also the points of the passage which are advantages and disadvantages.

Student 4 - 11 - 17 - Female
My comprehension performance had been bad so far. I answer the questions confidently thinking they are correct but upon seeing the outcomes, I get disappointed.
a. To find out something
b. Free with
c. Something that was useful
d. To spend much money on a particular item because it is expensive
e. Special thing that one want to reveal on a special occassion. (Gift)

2. I lose hope that I might make it on this comprehension because those unfamiliar word might make the whole passage unclear. Well, I check how they are used in the passage and get clue of their meaning.

*****5. I usually encouter challenges on writer's craft questions. Those challenges include like of questions which goes like "Which effect is created by the word 'breeze' that cannot be created by 'blow'." They are challenging because according to my understanding they are like synonyms, they mean the same thing.

Student 5 - 11 - 17 - Female
Beyond bad, because I obtained lower marks compared to my last. This is because I always find ut more hard to answer some questions.
a. Find out
b. Full of
c. Useful
d. Expensive
e. Gift

2. I always feel bad whenevr I encounter unfamiliar word, but, I maintain meaning in context, I do not consider the real defination of that particular word, but the way the writer use or expressed it matters a lot to me.

Student 6 - 11 - 20 - Female
It is not so bad because when we were writing March exams I managed to get 60% in comprehension, though in June exams I got 50%.
a. Find out
b.
c. Useful
d. Expensive
e. Gift

2. I feel angry because it when I realize that I am not longer going to pass comprehension since I'm unfamiliar with those words. But at the end I will keep on thinking until I answer.

Student 7 - 11 -   - Male
I am scoring the same marks more than [] I am finding some of difficult words in the passafe so fail to understand the passage.
a. Any that is afordable
b. Anythings that are matching
c. Something that is sevior
d. Something that is expensive to purchase
e. Gift

2. I feel so shocked when encountering unfamiliar words because I am not going to understand the passage. Therefore trying to change unfamiliar words using the context of the passage.



School B which is a government school in a rural area shows similarity to School A. The learners honestly answer that their performance in reading comprehension is very bad. This is self evident in their writing as much as it is in their answers. However, one participant, Student 6 went as far as including her quarterly examination marks: "It is not so bad because when we were writing March exams I managed to get 60% in comprehension, though in June exams I got 50%." There marks are not necessarily bad as the national passmark is 50% thus it can be estimated that perhaps over 10% of the learner would be able to be just above the passmark - a very low percentage. Student 2's failure to even define one word of the five given is an indicator of just how badly some learners perform. His response goes to the effect, "My performance is no good because sometimes I do not understand the format of question. Such as the way we write points, for examples, point out the advantages and disadvantages of argiculture."







School C Urban Private
Student 1 - 11 - 18 - Female
My reading comprehension performance flactuates between average and below average. I believe this is because I find some questions challenging as I dont' understand them.
a. To find something
b. To be full of something
c. To much to deal with
d. Expensive
e. Current day

2. I feel scared as I don't know how to approach questions or context containing those unfamiliar words.

5. Own words and effect questions are a bit challenging because I don't know infact I don't understand the effect questions and I can't interpret them. I find own words questions tricky because I have poor vocabulary. I have started reading novels for vocabulary

Student 2 - 11 - 18 - Male
My performance in comprehension reading flactuates as it is sometimes average while other times below acceptable standards. This is due to my poor ability of understanding certain concepts
a. To find out
b. Filled with
c. Occupied
d. Expensive
e. To show

2. I feel dull-witted as it comes to my realization that I really lack vocabulary I try to think of and find the meaning in context.

5. Reading for ideas is quite challenging. I fail to extract content points out of the passage and understanding what the comprehension is all about, I find it challenginG because use of vocabulary is beyond my knowledge and understanding the meaning in context. My English language is basic because I lack vocabulary. I lately study book, magazines and newspaper to understand the use of words, and grammat.

Student 3 - 11 - 16 - Female
My reading comprehension performance is two sided. Sometimes it is very satisfactory while in some cases it is just average, I believe that it is because I sometimes take English language for granted, Once I get a taske of victory I feel like I can always magically pass the paperr without even studying or preparing.
a. To find out something.
b. To be filled with a certain emotion
c. Being busy/tackling something that gives you trouble
d. Expensive
e. Current day

2. When encountering unfamiliar words, I usually try to figure out how the word was used in the text and find a corresponding synonyms for the word. It becomes frustrating when I have no clue what they word means and why is was used in a certain way in the text.

5. Effect questions and own word questions. Effect questions are quite tricky because they ask you to consider how it affects the reader and in more cases I find it very difficult to understand how the text and the effect created by the given word. Own word questions are also demanding because they require vocabulary. I tried reaching out to my classmates but it only seemed easy when in class than in the examination.

Student 4 - 11 - 18 - Male
Lukewarm. I can never seem to get anything above 76%. The questions are usually very easy but I seem to take longer in this section.
a. Find out
b. Filled with
c. Burden
d. Risky
e. Showcase

2. Unbothered. The simple trick I have learnt is to just look for the meaning in context or how it is used in the sentence.

Reading for ideas. It is very time-consuming when I have to differentiate between what is and what is not a point. I also seem to have a problem with facts and opinions questions as I struggle to pick out opinions from the passage. To attempt to solve these problems, I usually take some time out of my day to look at a textbook or two.

Student 5 - 11 - 16 - Female
My equilibrium is imbalanced. This is because passage one for me is not as compelling as passage two. For this above mentioned reason, I'm likely to score higher marks on passage one in comparison to passage two. This issue my be caused by the obvious fact of being unable to think critically or outside the box. However, this does not curb me from performing impressively.
a. Unravel
b. To be filled with something
c. A heavy burden to carry
d. Something that acquired own strength
e. Being available

2. I'm normally relaxed because of the structer I've adopted. I usually read paragraph as variously as possible in order to understand the usage of the word within the paragraph. This structure hold great vitality as I am able to easily find a replacement for the word e.g a word or a phrase.

5. Implicit meaning questions from passage two are quite hard pill to swallow. The challenges that I regulary face when dealing with implicit meaning questions are being unable to tackle the address factual and effect questions. These challenges are tricky because my level of understanding in meaning of context is limited and underrated. I've tried to read as frequent as possible in order to exercise my brain and acquire skills such as critial thinking.

Student 6 - 11 - 18 - Female
My reading comprehension performance oscillates between average and below average mostly because I fail dismally to identify and recognise the required content as per the question inquired in passage one. Such as opinion questions. In passage two I am not able to answer implicit meaning questions.
a. To unravel
b. To be filled with something
c. A heavy burden to carry
d. Takes a valuable asset from one
e. Be there

2. When I encouter unfamiliar words I feel overwhelmed. I handle them by using context clues to understand their meaning.

Student 7 - 11 - 16 - Male
My performance is at the bare minimum to be lowest. It is a challenge because the required standard that a person has to have are quite unreasonable like taking out content points. These content points are challenging to take out because there can be no different between important points and less points, also, futher clarifications of points semmes like context points. Regarding reading for meaning passage, the construction of questions is so robust that is gives us different outcomes to the questions which leads us to getting lost mid-way.
a. To find something
b. To be full of something
c. Something challenging or giving one troubles
d. Something that takes something valuable from someone
e. To giveout information about something or enlighten people about a certain thing thing OR a gift OR the current day or when there are people available for a certain something.

2. I feel challenged because it expands my brain capacity and the way I think gets changed as new things require people to get knowledge on them as to understand them.

Student 8 - 11 - 16 - Male
I find the reading comprehension very challenging because of the hidden content points and I can hardly tell the difference between important information and additional. Also, the comprehension is sometimes written with unique words to a point whereby I can not even understand it. My performance is average.
a. To find out about something
b. To overflow with something because you are good at it
c. A burden that is over one's power or control
d. Takes something that is important to someone
e. To be available at a particular place at a particular time

2. I usually freeze when I encounter unfamiliar words because I wonder what if I get the word wrong and completely get the whole meaning wrong. I try by all means to understand the word by reading the whole paragraph and substituting the words by the ones I think can fit.

Student 9 - 11 - 16 - Female
My reading vocabulary experience flactuates because of my limited vocabulary and lack of ability to apply vocabulary and understand it.
a. To unravel
b. Filled with
c. Valuable
d. Available
e. Challenging

2. When encountering unfamiliar words, I feel confused because I suddenly lose the meaning of the context being delivered by the comprehension and I handle them by re-reading the paragraphs where there are unfamiliar words.

Student 10 - 11 - 18 - Male
I would describe my performance as avergae because based on my experience, my results usually flactuate between 60's and 70'.

2. I feel like an illiterate at some point and some times I get confused by the structering of the question. Eventhough, I don't go distressing but I try to brainstorm and make sense out of them.







School D Rural Church
Student 1 - 11 - 16 - Female
It is neither good nor bad but sometimes difficult words appear in the comprehension and it can hinder my answering performance to be some questions can cause my marks to drop drastically due to unknow words. Sometimes knowing words can help me to achieve higher mark because I will be able to answer question that are related to the passage.

2. I normally fell confused because I won't be able to answer the questions that will follow concerning the passage. Sometimes I skips the words that I don't know and continue with the ones I know or I just interact with them they way they are used in the comprehension no matter what their meaning depending on the vocabulary or how I normally know them according to my knowledge



Student 2 - 11 - 17 - Male
My reading comprehension performance is not good at all because in a comprehension there are many difficult vocabularies and when a students read that vocabulary, they don't understand it, they even waste time because they take long to read that vocabulary. Also, the english that is used in the comprehension is not clearly gives meaning, so actually when students are told to give out meaning of words, the found different answers.

2. I feel confused when encountering unfamiliar words and feel dizzy because the writter knows his/her vocabulary and make a comprehension with those vocabulary without thinking that students can be able to understand it or not. Also, students will write test as they know their own vocabulary maybe is easy but when combine with difficult vocabulary, they confuse them.

5. Questions that want the meaning of words and when describing a sentence in your own words. I find them challenging because that comprehension is made up of many difficult vocabolaries, so as I read I don't understand all information/message that is inside the comprehension. In solution, I realized that comprehension is difficult, so a student need to read vocabulary a lot before writting and student have to practise meaning in context.

Student 3 - 11 - 16 - Female
Based on my experience, my reading comprehension is poor because sometimes difficult words appear in the comprehension and it can hinder my answering performance to be poor and not being able to answer some questions can cause my makrs to drop drastically due to unknown words. Sometimes knowing words can help me to achieve high marks because I will be able to answer questions that are related to the comprehension.

2. I fell stressed because I won't be able to answer the questions that will follow concerning that passage. Sometimes I skip the words that I don't know and continue with the ones I know or I normally use them the way they are used in the comprehension no matter their meaning depending on the vocabulary or how I normally know them according to my knowledge.

***Student 4 - 11 - 15 - Female
My reading comprehension skills are pretty solid and I think its because I have access to a lot of information and can process it quickly. Moreover, I'm also able to understand context and pick up the subtle meanings, which helps me to understand the text better. Least, I'm not perfect, sometimes I miss out on certain subtleties, especially when I'm reading comprehension that have lot of emotions. But overall, I'm pretty satisfied with my reading comprehensions abilities.

2. I'm anxious hecause I don't know if it will be important to understand the sentence so, to handle these unafamiliar words I typically to look them up in a dictionary or try to guess theur meaning based on the context in which they apprear. Leastly, I try to remember the words that I don't understand so that I can learn more about them later.

Student 5 - 11 - 17 - Female
It is neither poor nor good. Sometimes difficult words appear in the comprehension and it can hinder my answering performance to be poor and not being able to answer some questions can cause my marks to drop drastically due to unknown words. Sometimes knowing words can help me to achieve higher marks because I will be able to answer questions thare related to the passage.

2. I normally feel confused because I won't be able to answer the questions that will follow concerning the passage. Sometimes I skip the words that I don't know and continue with the ones I know or I just interact with them the way they are used in the comprehension no matter their meaning depending on their vocabulary or how I normally know them according to my knowledge.

5. Comprehensions that ask meaning in context meaning are difficult as not always will it be understandable and they may require full knowledge about experience. Sometimes it is easier for me to answer them with the meaning with the one in the text.

Student 6 - 11 - 17 - Male
The comprehension is so difficult because there are so many difficult words. The English that is used in the comprehension is not clearly gives a meaning, and it may gives different meanning from students. So this causes misunderstanding. The major cause of misunderstanding is the use of bombastic words and vocabulary together with proverbs because all this thing my give different meaning to several people.

2. When seeing the words that we are not familiar with them we try as much as we can to read for understanding and this take us a long time. I think the writer want to challenge us. Normally when seeing those words that we are not familiar with and we are asked to express those words according to our knowledge these is where we start to read many times and get meaning after long time. 

Student 7 - 11 - 16 - Male
The reading comprehension enhance brain activity because it engages the mind and it requires focus when reading. Also it improves the vocabulary, because when writting the compositions you may need them to make the compositions to be attractive to people. It also develop critical thinking and help us to differentiate ideas.

2. I typically handle them by reading the paragraph where the word is, then think based on how the word is being used and use my own vocabulary comparing the word.

5.The comprehension question which is true or false on my own experience gives me a problem because it needs my own knowledge on how the question is being asked. Also the comprehension question that need my own experience it is difficult because I need to understand the stem of the question and answer according to what I think or what I can do based on the questions.







School E Urban Church
Student 1 - 11 - 16 - Female
Poor. I sometimes don't understand the comprehension because of the words used, some of them I'm not familiar with so I dont't find it difficult to understand the whole text because of the words I'm not familiar and this lead to my poor performance in English. Which I'm not happy with.

2. I feel emotional, because I think I might loose marks for not understanding the words because it is also going to be difficult for me to understand the passage and that will leade to my poor performance in english. After writing the paprt I try to go over the comprehension and understand what it is really about and make myself familiar with those words by writing them in my vocabulary.

5. One word question, I sometimes don't know the word or sometimes I don't be sure if it is the correct word. Explain fully questions, sometimes I don't understand the text so I won't be able to explain the question fully. Pick one word from the text question, I find it difficult because the words that could describe the certain word I don't know them.

Student 2 - 11 - 16 - Male
I am not quite perfect in reading comprehension because there is never a time I pass it at school. Because it requires people with high understanding of english and a person with lot of vocabulary. So I don't have a lot of vocabulary or if I do I don't have enough to stand against any questions I come across.

2. I feel helpless because I am unable to solve them. I try to read around the word that I find it difficult and suggest what could it mean.

*****5. "Explain in your own words" question and "What effect is created by the word and cannot be achieved by the other word" also meaning context. These kind of question requires lot of understanding that can be influenced by the broad vocabulary by the student.. I choose to go to my classmates and ask for help from those who seem to perform well in them.

Student 3 - 11 - 16 - Female
My performance is totally poor and based on my experience while reading comprehension. It's because while reading the comprehension I can not understand some of the words then I decide to skip them. which make it difficult for me to understand the meaning of the whole passage. Also the vocabulary that used in the passage is quite difficult for me to understand. I also face the problem of not being able to interprete the questions or answer the questions since I do not know some of the words or even phrases used. Not knowing how some questions are same of the questions.

2. I feel like I could go around and check that word in the dictionary but there is no need or use because I'm in an exam room, nowhere to hide but to write or guess them. It's because I do not know that particular word and I have not see the word ever in my life. I just assume that maybe this word means this while still reading the words that are around that word I do not know. I also try to separate that word and try to brainstorm each single word that has been combined to create that particular words.

5. I fail to pick uo the right word that is need to be replaced or own word question.

Student 4 - 11 - 17 - Male
My reading comprehension performance alway fluctuates because sometimes I invest all my energy in becoming better and sometimes it is not constant because I tend not to use vocabulary. My english sometimes has many errors because I don't check my work after writing and so the message is not clear and incomprehensible hence I get low marks.

2. I always feel overwhelmed because I do not acknowledge the word at hand and so the typical thing or strategy that I always use it to pick random words that are lingering in my mind and which ever feels right to me is the right word for the approach.

5. The own-word question are very challenging because I am expected to replace word from phrase taken from the passage and something I don't have the vocabulary to correct approach the question in hand and so tend to make up words that don't even exist.

**Student 5 - 11 - 16 - Female
Not entirely poor, but I do not perform exceptionally well. I mostly ranges between 60% and 69% and I believe it is because I need more practice. Lately, the teacher has been giving us more question papers and I've observed a positive impact on my performance. This is why I believe practising more will results in great performace.

2. I often feel very frustrated and irritared and usually spend more time on that particular word. I sometime read on without trying to fully understand how the word is used and what is could mean. This action, however, negatively affects my performance on questions where I have to use my own words.

Student 6 - 11 - 16 - Male
My reading comprehension is very low and is not promising. Because I don't give my time to studies. I do not read anymore. I am lazy and I don't care for my school work. I do not have any vocabulary because I do not read any english materials such as novels.

2. I feel annoyed and helpness when I encounter such word while reading because I do not know their meaning and I myself do not know how to pronounce them. After reading the in the exam after time out. I check their meaning in the dictionary or search them in the internet. Exept those I use any material to find such words.

Student 7 - 11 - 17 - Female
My reading comprehension performace is flunctuating. This is because sometimes I get too much comfortable when ever I get the highest mark and therefore I no longer read like I used to read. But sometimes I fell underpressure of correcting each and every question thus I end up failing to answer correctly.

2. I feel exited because I love challenges and also enjoy learning new things.

Student 8 - 11 - 16 - Male
For myself, reading comprehension has been quite challenging because I have been acquiring low marks. This is because each time, I encounter new words that I cannot comprehend. I therefore get mislead and have a meaning that is way different from the correct one. As a result I answer questions based on the wrong theory and provide irrelevant information when answering.

***2. I feel disapointed and I sometimes feel like giving up. However, I try to identify the word that could be used in their place and still make a comprehension that makes sense. I, therefore, assume that they are synonyms of those words I have identified. Then I use them as synonyms of those words.

Student 9 - 11 - 17 - Female
My performance fluctuates. I pass at times because I sometimes find the comprehensions difficult ot tackle. I sometimes fail to understand the complex words and I cannot manage time to answer all the questions. I sometimes skip some questions and answer the ones I find easy to tackle and answer only them. Skipping those questions costs me because most of the questions I choose to answer award me only 2 or 1 mark. I fail to replace words correctly and I fail to simplify words for myself.

2. I feel dumb and need to work harder and go extra_miles to seek help from those who master answering comprehension question, I try to read novels, dictionary and familiarise myself to those kind of question papers and see how the questions are asked. I download question papers, answer then and mark myself using the markscheme. I ask for help from students who passed English and listen to them tell me how they did that correctly.

Student 10 - 11 - 16 - Male
My performance depends on how I understand the passages. If I dont understand the passage I perform very poorly on the paper, but some passages I perform not really good but I manage to pass the paper with a symbol D. Over the past two years I've got only percentages of 50's and 60'.

2. I feel tempted to go through the dictionary to look for that word immediately after writing. While writing and reading if I dont understand the words I try to read the whole text around the word and try to fine the effect of the word on the sentence if it is a verb, noun or adjective so that I try to make up and get the correct simple word. I feel good about the words because they give me the challange I need for the brain.














Having went through all the student responses for question one of the questionnaire, the position remains - the reading comprehension performance of Grade 11 learners is disappointing. It is but a few students about of close to 50 that were able to say their performance thus far had been satisfactory. For instance, Student 4 from School D wrote, "My reading comprehension skills are pretty solid and I think its because I have access to a lot of information and can process it quickly. Moreover, I'm also able to understand context and pick up the subtle meanings, which helps me to understand the text better. Least, I'm not perfect, sometimes I miss out on certain subtleties, especially when I'm reading comprehension that have lot of emotions. But overall, I'm pretty satisfied with my reading comprehensions abilities." The students responses are consistent with the teacher responses and more than 80% of the Grade 11 learners do not perform well in reading comprehension.




Understanding the attitudes of Grade 11 learner in reading comprehension is beyond just taking their responses at face-value; instead, it also requires reading in between the lines to get an idea of their actual attitudes which may conveyed by their writing tones. Learners from School E share a common attitude towards reading comprehension. Their performance is low thus indicating that they struggle with reading comprehension. However, they are not defeated soldiers; while they may lose the battles, the war has not been lost yet. It can be understood that they are continuously trying to improve their performance and maintain an optimism for their performance. They reveal that the struggling pushes them to wanted to acquire more vocabulary by reading more, looking up definitons in dictionaries and the internet. They want to do better. They go as far as consulting with their counterparts that do better than them to find out how good performance is attained. Some students have this brilliant strategy they use in examinations when they come across unfamiliar and "difficult" words. They read then entire sentence in which the "difficult" word is used and they attempt to make sense of the entire sentence and thus understand the meaning of the word. This is something someone with a positive attitude towards learning and performing better would do. Student 10 explains how he makes use of this strategy: "I feel tempted to go through the dictionary to look for that word immediately after writing. While writing and reading if I dont understand the words I try to read the whole text around the word and try to fine the effect of the word on the sentence if it is a verb, noun or adjective so that I try to make up and get the correct simple word. I feel good about the words because they give me the challange I need for the brain." Some learners from School D have a rather negative outlook on reading comprehension. They feel that writers are out to get them and reveal their lack of knowledge and it seems that they do not feel the need to acquire broader vocabulary and become more proficient because at the end of the day, the writer just wants to show them just how much they do not know. This can be seen from Student 2 when he says, "the writter knows his/her vocabulary and make a comprehension with those vocabulary without thinking that students can be able to understand it or not." Student 6 reinforces this: " I think the writer want to challenge us." Upon going through the answers of students from different schools, it is safe to conclude that a large number of learners continue to maintain a positive attitude toward reading comprehension despite continually getting low marks in reading comprehension examinations. Thus leading to removing attitude as a cause of their below-average performance. Some students from School A view reading comprehension as a tool to expand their vocabulary and improve their vocabulary proficiency and thus their grasp of the English language. Student 9 says, "I feel excited because I get to add more on the vocabulary words I have which help me in improving my command of English as a language. Although I will be in an exam at that moment, I make sure that when I get out of the exam room I check for the meaning of the word and begin using it daily when I speak and when I write so that I do not have problems when I encounter it next time in another paper." 

