The data can further be analysed to reveal the performance trends based on location of the schools attended by the interviewees and their genders. In the rural-based School A, three out of the fives female students interviewed stated that their reading comprehension performance is below average; one of these females went on to say: “…Sometimes the vocabulary used in some questions makes me fail to understand the meaning of the question…” All five male students indicated than their performance is also bad. Thus 80% of the participants perform poorly in reading comprehension performance. Moving on to School B, which is a rural-based, government school, revealed results similar to those obtained in School A. All four of the male students interviewed said they get poor results while only one of the three female students stated that she manages to pass reading comprehension. Therefore over 85% of the students obtain poor results for reading comprehension. Thus far 14 out of 17 students are unable to perform in a satisfactory manner. It is implied that at the remaining three perform well and all three are female. This could indicate that female students put in more effort towards performing well. The results in School C, an urban private school, were consistent with those already seen – exactly the same as those in School A. Just 20% of the students said they were performing well. Student 4, an 18-year-old Male student, answered, “Lukewarm. I can never seem to get anything above 76%. The questions are usually very easy but I seem to take longer in this section.” In Schools D and E – both of which are church schools with one an urban-based while the other a rural-based school – 9 females out of 17 students interviewed four are of the belief that their performance in not bad with three of them from School D. Of the remaining 8 male students only two do not perform below average. It can thus be concluded that over 80% of the Grade 11 students are unable to do well in the English language reading comprehension. In the 20% that does get better marks, there is only a slight imbalance in gender, i.e., there are slightly more females than males. 